Name: NGDP, the Nordic Model and Neoliberalism ft. Scott Summer
Date: 2018-06-10
Host: Colin Mortimer
Guest(s): Scott Summer

[Scott Summer] 0:02
Now unfortunately, this is a little tricky to explain in words, but I'll try to give you one 
sort of thought experiment that might make it easier to see. Suppose you had twin brothers, 
who started life at age, you know, started their work life at age 18. Neither inherited any 
money. And they both had the same job throughout their entire career. Making, whatever amount, 
say $100,000 a year. I think you'd look at those two brothers as having essentially identical 
economic situations that one would not be in any meaningful sense better off than the other 
one. However, if one of the brothers chose to spend most of that money when he was young, and 
the other brothers saved a lot and spent a lot when he was old, the official income data would 
show the more thrifty brother as being much richer or better off than the one that was spending 
the money when he was young. Now in reality, it would just be like choosing different goods. 
So some people may like one type of product. Chevy's, someone else might like BMW is the same 
way someone might like to consume when they're young, another person might like to consume when 
they're old. And if you decide to consume when you're old, you're going to earn capital income. 
And that's going to make you look better off whereas in reality, you're only choosing a 
different path of consumption essentially. So when you tax income from capital, what you're 
really doing is you're double taxing wage income, both at the point where it's earned and again, 
taxing it later when it's spent. And that's what basically I'm opposed to.

[Colin Mortimer] 1:48
Our guest this week is the one and only Scott Summer. He is professor of economics at Bentley 
University, the director of the program of monetary policy at the mercatus Center at George 
Mason University, and a prolific blogger at the moneyillusion.com. His ideas were credited with 
helping to end the Great Recession, and he continues to influence the conversation around 
economic policy in this nation and abroad. Today, we talk to him about the Nordic model and why 
it might also be a model for neoliberalism, while you're getting the concept of income 
inequality completely wrong, and of course, about nominal GDP targeting. Enjoy.

[Colin Mortimer] 2:24
This break is brought to you by our Kickstarter backer Brent Vanden. thanks to people like 
Brent, this podcast was able to get off the ground in no time at all. We are extremely grateful 
for their support. Continuing to fund this podcast is not without expenses, we ship microphones 
to all of our guests and have to pay hosting fees. If you would like to support the podcast, 
head over to patreon.com/neolibpodcast where you can get access to our full interviews or join 
our monthly sticker club. Our full interviews run twice as long as a regular episode, include 
all the raw, unfiltered audio you would not otherwise hear. Our monthly sticker club is a pet 
project of mine. Every month we commissioned a new neoliberal sticker and send it right to your 
door. I hope you consider joining one and support the pod. Now enjoy the rest of the show.

[Colin Mortimer] 3:10
So Scott, I've heard you call yourself a neoliberal before, but I've also heard you call 
yourself a classical liberal before. Would you describe your views as being in between those 
two or something else entirely?

[Scott Summer] 3:23
Yeah, so these terms have meaning that is a little bit ambiguous. So it sort of depends on the 
context, I suppose when neoliberalism is being attacked by people that are sort of opposed to 
free markets, then I sort of identify with neoliberals. Obviously, within that group, there's 
gonna be differences on specific issues. And my views may be a little bit more small government 
than some other people within the same general category.

[Colin Mortimer] 3:55
So another interesting thing about your views is that you also think the Nordic system is a 
really great model for America to follow. But interestingly enough, someone like Bernie Sanders 
in 2016, held up the Nordic model as a great example of democratic socialism. Can you explain 
to me why it's not a democratic socialist model, but a neoliberal model?

[Scott Summer] 4:16
Right, so there's, I think, sort of two ways of thinking about government involvement in the 
economy. One is the size of the social insurance system, various programs like Social Security, 
national health care, things like that. And then there's a whole sort of range of government 
interventions in markets that would include things like price controls, tariffs, nationalization 
of industry, regulatory barriers to entry to industry, things that move you away from a free 
market. So I think it's important to distinguish between those Two types of government 
involvement in the economy. And what you have in the Scandinavian countries is sort of a high 
level of free markets combined with a pretty high level of social insurance. And in other cases, 
you may have the opposite. In many developing countries, you have a lot of what I call statism, 
statism referring to a high level of intervention in markets, but not a lot of social insurance. 
So those are two different ways in which governments can intervene in the economy. And my view 
is, if they are intervening, it's probably better to do so through free markets, plus social 
insurance, rather than a lot of other types of intervention without social insurance.

[Colin Mortimer] 5:46
So then, what do you classify as a good intervention?

[Scott Summer] 5:49
Well, I think the, I'm sort of a utilitarian. So I basically believe in the notion that $1 is 
worth more to a poor person than a rich person. On the other hand, I am a little more worried 
about the side effects of redistribution than most people on the left. So I guess I come down 
as sort of a moderate on this, I think there are certain types of policies that are reasonable 
where we can redistribute, redistribute money, without too much of a disincentive effect. One 
example would be, say wage subsidies for low wage workers, which would boost their income as 
long as they were actually working. And you can have fully funded social insurance programs 
where, like in Singapore where people contribute to funds that they can draw on when they're 
retired, you can have health savings accounts, again, like in Singapore, where they contribute 
to a fund that can be drawn upon when they have health care expenses. So I think there's ways 
of addressing income inequality, the need for old age insurance and health care costs, that 
are still fairly consistent with the free market and don't cause undue stress on incentives.

[Colin Mortimer] 7:17
So going off topic for a second, and I want to ask you about something that's been in the news 
recently, would you say the recent republican tax bill is a net positive or net negative?

[Scott Summer] 7:28
Okay, so on the specific issues that I've been talking about, I think the recent tax bill was 
basically good, because it reduced the tax on investment income, and also did a few things that 
simplified the tax system. So more people will be able to itemize. So I think on balance, the 
bill was good. However, I should say there are other ways of evaluating the tax bill and one 
valid criticism is that the bill really wasn't paid for. So it's going to increase the budget 
deficit at a time when we really shouldn't be increasing the budget deficit. So from a sort of 
like fiscal policy point of view, it's really too expansionary. It would have been better to 
try to make up the revenue in some other way, or maybe cut spending a little. Instead, we just 
decided to increase the deficit. So I'm concerned about that. But in terms of the actual 
structure of the tax bill itself, it does make the tax system a little bit more consumption 
oriented. And in that sense, it's a net positive.

[Colin Mortimer] 8:38
Yeah, thank you for that. I know, you'll differ pretty strongly with your liberal economist 
counterparts on that answer, but I appreciate hearing a counter take on that. I'm going to ask 
you about the inevitable question, and that is about nominal GDP targeting. Why target nominal 
GDP instead of inflation?

[Scott Summer] 8:58
Okay, so I think that I view nominal GDP targeting as promoting two types of stability, labor 
market stability and financial system stability. I think labor market stability is the best 
single argument. So when we think of sort of the macroeconomic problems that we face over time, 
deep recessions like 2008, and 2009 are clearly one of the most severe macroeconomic problems 
in terms of effects on people's lives. Especially the high unemployment, the difficulty of 
people finding jobs, Millennials had trouble getting jobs, people had their careers ruined. 
So if we can have a monetary policy that avoids severe recessions like 2008, and 2009, I think 
that's a huge plus. And I won't claim that nominal GDP targeting will completely prevent 
recessions. But I think it will make them much milder than they would be under the existing 
monetary policy regime. And I could explain how briefly if you'd like, sort of the intuition. 
Basically, what's going on here is the nominal wages tend to be pretty sticky. That is you, 
you sign an agreement to work a year and say $15 an hour. And therefore, when nominal GDP 
falls, there's less total revenue being earned by businesses to pay wages. And what happens is, 
workers end up losing jobs. When there's a decline in nominal GDP. I compare it to the game of 
musical chairs. When the music stops, if you pull away a couple chairs, then a couple 
contestants will have to be sitting on the floor, and nominal GDP, since it's the total amount 
of revenue earned by all businesses, when it declines, companies have less money to pay wages. 
And since the hourly wage rate does not immediately fall in response to this, you end up having 
fewer hours worked, which means more unemployment. Now, in theory, if all wages were flexible, 
and went up and down with the economy, we could maybe maintain full employment. But that's only 
in theory. I mean, in reality, sticky wages are a part of the system. And there's probably no 
way we can really eliminate that problem. So we need a monetary policy that recognizes wages 
are sticky. And I think nominal GDP targeting is the best one for dealing with that reality.

[Colin Mortimer] 11:31
You also say something super specific, and that is that we should target 4% growth in nominal 
GDP. Then on the other hand, someone like George Seligman argues that we should be targeting 
the growth of the labor stock. Can you explain why 4% is your measure of choice and not 
something else?

[Scott Summer] 11:49
Okay, so there's trade offs here, if it's too high, you have the problems associated with high 
inflation. Now, if it's too low, I would worry about two issues, perhaps a little bit more than 
than George is worried. And those two issues are one the zero bound on interest rates. So at 
very, very low rates of growth, interest rates are more likely to be at zero. And the monetary 
policymakers are not very good at doing monetary policy when interest rates are stuck at zero. 
And there's also a sort of a zero bound problem for wages, due to what sometimes called money 
illusion. So wages do have some flexibility in the long run, I mean, workers will take pay cuts 
or pay increases eventually. But one of the problems is that there's sort of a barrier of zero. 
Psychologically, it's very difficult to cut wages in a nominal sense. Let me give you an 
example. Suppose that inflation is running at about 4% a year, and you give workers a 3% pay 
increase, they probably won't be thrilled with that. But you know, it might not be viewed as 
that big a deal. It's 1% less than the inflation rate, so their real wage goes down 1%. But if 
the inflation rate were say, zero, and you gave workers a 1% pay cut, they're more likely to 
view that as sort of a personal insult, because people tend to think in nominal terms. So if 
you cut their nominal wage, that that really seems worse, I think, to the average person than 
reducing their real wage more subtly through inflation. And for that reason, I think the labor 
market is a little more flexible. If the average inflation rate is slightly above zero, or 
average nominal GDP growth rate is slightly above zero. And that way, when wages do need to 
fall in a particular industry, because there's been some kind of downturn in that industry, 
it's easier to accommodate that reduction in real wages, through slower growth in nominal 
wages, rather than actually having to cut the nominal wage, by By the way, by nominal wage, I 
mean, sort of the actual wage that people see on their paycheck, that's what people focus on. 
And that's what's difficult to cut below 0% increase. And so there's actually economic data 
that shows that. If you look at a bell shaped distribution of wage increases, right at 0%, 
there's a tremendous drop off. So there's many, many more wage changes of 012, then the same 
minus one. And clearly there's a psychological barrier at that level.

[Colin Mortimer] 14:40
So you've written about how in the 20th century, the miracle of neoliberalism is a miracle we 
don't talk enough about and then you again wrote in 2010, about how neoliberalism was gonna 
hold strong to the next decade. We're in 2018 now, and it looks like neoliberalism is on the 
decline. With the elected politicians were putting in power and economic policies that were 
pushing. Can you talk to me? Do you think you were wrong in 2010?

[Scott Summer] 15:12
Right. So I think the great recession has been a little bit of a setback for neoliberalism, and 
not just the Great Recession, but maybe the 21st century as a whole. So the heyday of 
neoliberalism was definitely the 80s and 90s, maybe into the early 2000s. But there have been 
some setbacks. On the other hand, sometimes I think the setbacks are more sort of in terms of 
the Zeitgeist, the ideological views circulate around the world than the actual policy. So I 
don't think though, in a strict policy sense, the world is necessarily becoming all that much 
less neoliberal. You know, you still have countries trying to sign free trade agreements, you 
still have gradual moves towards the market economy in big places like China and India. You 
know, you can still find places that you you still have cases where countries that get into 
economic crises like Greece are under pressure to have market oriented reforms to make their 
economy more market oriented. So I would say it's a mixed bag, but certainly in the United 
States and Britain and number of a number of other countries, there has been a swing away from 
neoliberalism. You have a rise of interest in politicians like Sanders and Corbin that are more 
statist in their policy views, anti neoliberal. And certainly, I would say the, the golden age 
of neoliberalism has ended, but we have definitely not seen a dramatic swing back to the policy 
regime of the 1970s. So we'll have to see what happens going forward. But you still don't have 
things like across the board wage price controls, and we haven't reregulated the airline 
industry and trucking industry. And there's many, many changes that occurred during that 
period that have not been reversed. I would even add that the recent corporate tax bill was 
consistent with neoliberalism, which emphasizes taxing consumption.

[Colin Mortimer] 17:26
What aggravates me is that people use the term neoliberalism to describe things that really 
aren't neoliberalism. And it just became a slur for things they didn't like about government 
inaction or economic policy.

[Scott Summer] 17:41
Yeah, and that's always been true. I mean, that's also true for the term capitalism. It's a 
term mostly used by the critics, I mean, very, the defenders usually use another term to 
describe their own beliefs. And you know, what, what people tend to do is, if they don't like 
capitalism, or neoliberalism, they assign the term basically two things they don't like about 
particular countries, right? So they'll focus on sort of the the negative aspects of what they 
see is neoliberalism, and the more positive aspects they'll overlook. So the critics of 
neoliberalism, often are surprised when people point out that someplace like Denmark is 
actually a highly neoliberal economy, because it doesn't meet their sort of dark, dystopian 
vision of what neoliberalism is all about. But if you actually, when I did a study in 2008, I 
found that if you took away the one issue of like size of spending on social programs, and 
looked at all the other measures of free markets that you find in like the Heritage Institute, 
index of economic freedom, Denmark was actually number one and economic freedom except for the 
category of size of government. You know, it actually ended up somewhere around number 10 on 
the list, because it had such a large welfare state. But on all the other categories, averaged 
out, it ended up being the most neoliberal economy in the world. And I think most people don't 
think of it that way, because they think of this term in more ideological context of left 
versus right. And neoliberalism, as I describe it, that is free markets, plus social insurance 
doesn't fit neatly into that left versus right dichotomy.

[Colin Mortimer] 19:32
That makes sense. So what you're saying is that you wouldn't be very upset if the United States 
moved towards, say the Danish model.

[Scott Summer] 19:40
No, I wouldn't necessarily be more upset, but it really depends how it does that. So if the 
only thing that did was to make a larger welfare state, then I actually would be upset by that 
because I think that would be a step in the wrong direction. But if it did all the other things 
that Denmark does, if we move to freer trade more open to foreign investment, more open to 
privatization, you know, Denmark privatizes many activities that are done by the public sector 
in the United States. Those are the changes that I would support. But those are of course, not 
the changes that Bernie Sanders is referring to when he talks about Denmark, he's referring 
mostly to the size of the social welfare state. And not only do I think this welfare state is 
a little bit too large in Denmark, I also think that Denmark is a country much more suited to 
a large welfare state than the United States. So the same welfare policies in Denmark, adopted 
here would work much, much less effectively than they work in Denmark, because of cultural 
differences. Basically, Denmark has a culture that is extremely high trust society, by some 
measures, the highest in the entire world. And welfare states tend to work better in high trust 
societies.

[Colin Mortimer] 21:05
Could you elaborate more then on how you see cultural differences affecting the effects of 
certain policies?

[Scott Summer] 21:17
Right. So in my study, one metric I used for a high trust society was a survey question that 
was done all over the world. They asked people this question, is it acceptable to accept 
government benefits to which you're not entitled? Not entitled? Like, is it okay to take 
government benefits that you're not entitled to? And the people most likely to say, no, that's 
not acceptable, lived in Denmark? Okay. Now, if you looked at all of the answers for all the 
countries of the world where they asked this question, generally speaking, the rich countries 
tended to be more high trust societies, developing countries tend to be more low trust society. 
In within Europe, like Denmark was one extreme Greece was the other extreme. Another thing you 
find is that if you correlate that sort of public opinion with other independent measures of 
corruption, they're highly correlated. So in countries that are high trust, where people say 
you shouldn't take government benefits, to which you're not entitled, there tend to be very, 
very low levels of corruption. And so this sort of society like Denmark, there's a high level 
of what's called civic virtue, it's possible to run a pretty big welfare state because people 
will not abuse it, they'll only take the welfare benefits to which they're entitled, like, on 
average. Obviously, there's exceptions to that, but they're more likely to, you know, adhere to 
the spirit of the program. As you move to a lower trust society, it's more likely the system 
will be abused. And not surprisingly, you don't tend to observe very, very large welfare 
states, in low trust societies, because people would be more likely to abuse the system.

[Colin Mortimer] 23:00
And with that, Scott, thank you so much for taking time out of your day to speak with me. I 
really appreciate it. Thank you for listening to this week's episode, the Neolib podcast. 
Leave us a review if you liked this episode. Your host and doer of many things is Colin and 
our executive producer as always is John Lobb. We have a website at neoliber.al and at Twitter, 
which you can find on our website as well. Next week, we will sit down with Austin Allred to 
discuss how he is revolutionizing education with a company called lambda school. Hope to see 
you then.